# Analysis of Retellings of the Tabula Capitolina compared to the *Iliad*

Here I walk through the retellings for each book on the stone and compare them to the *Iliad*. Keep in mind that not all books appear in both the visual and textual retellings, while others are completely absent from the stone all together, due to the damage that it has sustained. I have placed the general trends of my analysis at the end of this page, after the discussion of the individual books. 

## Book 1

The pictorial retelling of this book is both expansive and precise. The band of images for book 1 occupies the prominent position of the top edge of the stone. As a result, it is about twice as long as the bands for books 13 through 24 (as well as the length that books 2 through 24 would have been in the stone's original condition). The band appears to contain five episodes, more than any other band on the Tabula Capitolina. Not only are there more episodes, but they are more highly labeled than the other episodes. Instead of merely providing names, as is the common practice for the bands of books 13 through 24, book 1 contains much more complete ideas. The first episode is labeled "ιερον απόλλωνος ζμινθέως χρυσης", and the fourth is labeled "οδυσσευς την εκατoμβην τω θεω αγων απολλωνι χρυσηις". This type of description is unique to the labels found in these labels is unique and noteworthy. The amount of space and detail given to book 1 shows its clear importance. Rather than reorganize the stone and place a band for the events of the *Cypria* at the top and twelve Iliadic books on each side, the artist chose to highlight book 1. This decision and its importance must not be overlooked. 

Due to its length and detail, the visual retelling of book 1 matches book 1 of the *Iliad* very closely. In both, Chryses invokes Apollo's wrath against the Greeks, the god sends a plague upon them, the Greeks hold an assembly to discuss the matter, Odysseus brings Chryseis and sacrifices back to Apollo, and Thetis duplicates Zeus on her son's behalf. The tabula goes so far as to name every single Greek who speaks during the assembly in its labels. The figure of Athena restrains Achilles by the hair in both the visual retelling and the *Iliad*. The inclusion of this element of the episode shows its essential nature and importance, as well as the stone artist's precision. The fact that Odysseus is named as the one bringing the sacrifices to Apollo, as he is in the *Iliad*, shows both the artist's attention to detail and his knowledge of the *Iliad*. 

The episode where Thetis supplicates Zeus is a prime example of how highly compressed these episodes can be. The reader does not get the initial part of the episode, namely Achilles plea to Thetis, but rather the outcome. Besides these two figures and their posture, no more information is needed in order for the audience to be able to recognize this episode. The labels serve to identify the figures, and the audience's knowledge of the poem fills out the rest. The Tabula is a highly compressed retelling, and therefore cannot spell out the entire episode, but rather chooses evocative moments that call the wider episode to mind. 

It is important to note that the episode that begins *Iliad* 1 on the stone may have not been the initial episode in the stone's original state. It is plausible that an episode where Chryses asks Agamemnon for his daughter back opened the retelling for this book. While Petrain does not explicitly propose this hypothesis, he does suggest that there are episodes missing from the band dedicated to the *Aethiopis* (Petrain 198). By extension, that would mean that there was more to be found in the band for book 1 as well. It is difficult to assert confidently what would have been depicted on the stone in its complete form. Given the fact that the preface is missing its first three words, and that there would have needed to be space for the first inscribed stele, I believe that an additional scene would have been found for book 1. Working off of the *Iliad*, an episode involving Chryses at the Greek ships makes the most logical sense. 

## Book 7

The textual retelling on the Tabula merely mentions that the Greeks built a wall and a trench around the ships. In its extant condition, it completely skips over the duel between Hector and Ajax, as well as the Trojans' unsuccessful peace attempt. An explanation for this is that neither episode changes the outcome or precipitates any action in the *Iliad*. Hector and Ajax part ways in a tie, and the Greeks rebuff the Trojans attempt to sue for peace by returning the stolen property alone, but not Helen. The Tabula seems to concern itself with events that further the action of the poem, and not side action or conversations that do not impact the course of the narrative. 

Another explanation for their exclusion, similar to book 1, is that they were not, in fact, excluded. The textual retelling does not mark Iliadic books in any way. Therefore, one does know where one book starts and the next ends expect for the narrative context. It is possible that at least the duel between Hector and Ajax, which takes up the bulk of book 7, was found at the end of the first stele, which is now lost. It is dangerous to assume that the extant stele must reflect the beginning of book 7. It is entirely possible, given my explanation above, but by no means conclusive. 


## Book 8

In book 8, the battle between the Greeks and Trojans rages hard. The textual retelling reflects the *Iliad* when it stresses that the Trojans camped in front of the ships. This fact precipitates the next several books of the poem because it breaks the series of lighter skirmishes that had characterized the first nine years of the Trojan War. The fact that this added element of the otherwise unremarkable fighting underscores a pattern that will be seen throughout the rest of the analysis: that the Tabula stresses actions that lead to other key moments in the narrative. 

The stone does not, however, include the actions of the gods. In *Iliad* 8, Zeus rebukes Hera and Athena, and then proceeds to strengthen the Trojans. Excluding Thetis' supplication of Zeus in book 1, the tabula does not show the actions of the gods in heaven. They are occasionally seen on the battlefield, as will be seen later, but never in assembly or dialogue amongst themselves. All of the action depicted on the stone takes place at Troy, without exception. The scene jumps found in the *Iliad* serve to augment its narrative, but do not prove essential enough for this retelling. The hand of the gods in the Trojan war is undeniable, but they do not appear repeatedly as Zeus grants and removes their permission to intervene. Instead, their presence is largely limited to direct actions that they take on the battlefield. 

## Book 9

Comparing the textual retelling for book 9 to the *Iliad* shows the importance of dividing episodes properly. One may be tempted to take the embassy to Achilles as one episode that encompasses the entirely of book 9. However, both the textual retelling and the poem itself suggest that it should be broken up into two episodes. First, as the text of the stele tells us, the Greeks discussed and arranged to send the embassy to Achilles. While the speech of Agamemnon is not preserved in the retelling, the idea behind it and the ensuing discussion causes the planning phase to be separated from the embassy itself. The details given by the stele, that Agamemnon plans to send back Briseis and gifts, show how this episode is distinct and elaborate. The actual embassy itself comes after, and is mentioned to be unsuccessful in both versions. Odysseus, Phoenix, and Ajax are essential figures in this episode, as they are mentioned explicitly where this scene appears. 

## Book 10

In contrast to book 9, the night raid is one episode, where the planning portion is merely an extra element. It is not given significant enough treatment in the *Iliad* nor in the textual retelling to merit its own episode. Much like the embassy to Achilles, the night raid has certain essential elements. The death of Dolon and Rhesus cannot be left out of this episode. This is seen through their expanded nature in the textual retelling. While Rhesus is only mentioned as "the Thracian" on the stele, and his true significance is famously not given in the *Iliad*, his importance to the course of the war would have been familiar to a tradition audience. There was a prophecy, as seen in other sources, that Troy would not be able to fall if Rhesus' horses drank from the river. While unnamed, this is the cause for Odysseus and Diomedes' seemingly unheroic slaughter of the Thracian king in his sleep. Obviously a length backstory like this would not figure in the textual retelling of the Tabula. 

## Book 11

Like most of the so called "battle books," the stele's retelling of book 11 closely matches the episodes found in the *Iliad*. Even in its highly compressed format, the stone still names all five of the Greek commanders who are wounded and forced to retreat from the fray. One can assume that, since all of them are named (and in the same order), that each of their injuries is an essential part of this episode. Any retelling needs to removed these five warriors from the battlefield in order to heighten the tension just before the Trojans breach the Greek fortifications. Next, there is a brief episode that takes place in Achilles' camp. Although he still retains his divine wrath, Achilles is greatly troubled about the course of the battle. He send Patroclus to Nestor in order to figure out what is going on. Here one sees the common trend of the Tabula to set up action that is to come later. This may seem like an insignificant episode, but it is necessary in order to stir up the emotions that cause Patroclus to beg to be allowed to go onto the battlefield in book 16. The textual retelling needs to connect its action in a logical way, and therefore preserves smaller, but still independent, episodes such as this one. 

## Book 12

Book 12 is made up of one complete episode in which Hector breaks through the Greek fortifications. The textual retelling has already moved the action just in front of the Greek walls, and therefore does not need to describe the way that the battle escalates. It is concerned with the final outcome and its impact on the narrative, not the way the events that lead to the outcome. One should not expect to find a description of how the Trojans planned to breech the walls in a retelling. That element would be far too specific and does not change the final outcome of Hector breaking through the walls.  

## Book 13

For the next three books, the stele's retelling is incredible brief, merely saying "...και μαχην συναπτει προς των νηων της δ ομαλης γινομενης..." It does not detail the way that the battle intensifies or the heroes that fall, but rather moves on to the outcome of this intense fighting, Patroclus entering the fighting. 

The pictorial retelling, which resumes here, cannot skip over the action on the battlefield, as it must show something for each book. When compared to the prose summary on the stele, the carved bands are, in a sense, freer to include finer detail and action that may not be strictly essential to the poem. One must imagine that an ancient audience would recognize the *Iliad* without the deaths of Akamas, Othryoneus , or Asteropaeus. Similarly, these names have not come down to a modern audience as being essential to the poem. However, when given the freedom to expand, the visual retelling chooses to name certain figures specifically. This helps identify the figures, as many of them are indistinguishable without these labels. It is difficult to assert the importance of behind these figures in the battle books. One may look at the death of Othryoneus in this book. He came to Troy in order to marry Cassandra, who appears on the stone during the *Ilioupersis* scenes. This connection to the wider myth of the Trojan war could make Othryoneus' death notable enough to be preserved in the pictorial retelling. However, this same logic does not explain why certain deaths are not depicted, such as Alcathous. He was the brother-in-law of Aeneas, a figure central to the Tabula Capitolina, and is called "ὤριστος ἐνὶ Τροίῃ εὐρείῃ (Iliad 13.433)" in the *Iliad*. One might expect to see his death depicted for these reasons, but it does not appear on the stone. The visual bands for the battle books cannot possibly show all of the deaths, but it is uncertain why certain ones take precedence over others. 


## Book 14

Book 14 is not represented in the textual retelling beyond the talk of fighting that covers books 13 through 15. The reason for this brevity is the same as for book 13 and 15. The textual retelling largely does not detail the individual actions on the battle field, but instead not the intensity of the battle and who has the upper hand. 

The carving pose some problems when compared to the text of the *Iliad*. According to the labels, the first episode shows Archelochus fighting with Locrian Ajax. However, in the Iliad, Locrian Ajax slays Satnius, and then Telamonian Ajax slays Archelochus inadvertently, when he was aiming at Polydamas. These two actions take place only twenty-four lines apart, and the Greek characters do, after all, share the same name. It would be easy to say that the artist of the Tabula simply made a mistaken, and labeled Ajax improperly. However, the Tabula is a highly complex and learned object. Mistakes are certainly probable, but highly unlikely on an object that was produced with such care. Instead, it is likely that these two figures, are meant to evoke the wider fighting that happens in this book. It is not necessary to show the individual actions alined precisely to each figure, but rather these two warriors stand for the battle as a whole. The two are closely, through not directly linked in the *Iliad*, so by placing them in reference to the other, the combinations calls to mind this section of the poem. 

The next two pairs of images are labeled as Ajax and Poseidon, and Hector and Apollo. The orientation of Ajax and Poseidon is perplexing, as the figures are facing each other, with Ajax appearing to be ready to strike the god. Poseidon fought on the side of the Greeks, and leads them into battle during book 14. Again, one could theorize that the figure is simply mislabeled, and that the figure labeled as Poseidon is meant to be one of Ajax's other victims. Yet, the figure does not wear armor, which supports its identifications as a god, since gods have no need for armor. Similarly, the figure labeled Apollo, who faces Hector in the next pair, does not wear any armor. These two pairs, taken side by side, make their orientation less problematic. While a modern audience might expect the gods going in front of their respective forces, the Tabula places them face to face in order to show the interaction. Their orientation does not denote a hostile nature, but rather shows a connection and interaction, and then lets the audience fill in the context based on their knowledge of the poem. Poseidon does not directly interact with Ajax in book 14, but instead, Ajax stands for the Greek forces, just as Hector stands for the Greek forces. However, Apollo does not figure in this book of the *Iliad* at all. Perhaps he is there to show the contrast and to balance out Poseidon's aid. Apollo does join the fray at the very beginning of book 15. The artist maybe have not been concerned with sticking rigidly to the narrative boundaries of each book. By moving Apollo's intervention to the end of book 14, the artist leaves himself more room to expand the episode for book 15, while not interrupting the narrative sequence of the poem. 

A notable omission in both of the Tabula's retellings is the episode of Hera and Zeus. This unique episode is what allows Poseidon, and later Apollo, to join the battle. Because of this casual link, as well as the Tabula's aversion to depicting events that do not take place at Troy, it is not entirely surprising that the artist removes this episode. However, the singularity of this episode and its extended treatment in the poem itself does call the reason for its absence into question. 

## Book 15

Still, the textual retelling for this book has been continued from books 13 and 14. It does not detail the attack on the Greek ships, but rather moves past the escalation of the battle until book 16 where Achilles learns of the situation. The visual retelling shows a group of Trojans standing before Hector, who is throwing a lit torch at the ship that Ajax and Teucer are defending. The labels do not identify Ajax and Teucer, but it is clear through comparison with the *Iliad* that that is who the hulking warrior and the smaller archer hiding behind his shield is meant to be those two. It is unusual that the caption reads "επι ναυσι μαχη," instead of their names, when the ship is so clearly present in the carving. But still, the fact that those two characters are not labels suggests that they would have been easily recognizable. 

The group of Trojans is also revealing about how these images retell the action of the book. The labels name some of the most memorable figures among the Trojans fighters: Hector, Aeneas, Paris, and Helenus. However, Paris and Aeneas only kill one man each within book 15. Helenus is not even named. It appears that the Tabula uses these names to stand in for the whole of the Trojan forces. They are not named in order to retell their individual actions, but rather to evoke the larger Trojan army. Cleitus dies unceremoniously, but one could make an argument for the inclusion of Caletor, particularly in his fallen position. Caletor was the first Trojan who tried to hurl a torch at the ships. In his attempt, Ajax strikes him down before he can light the ships on fire, thereby making Hector the first Trojan to achieve that goal. By including Caletor, especially laying injured on the ground, the Tabula shows the ultimate outcome of the action, namely that Hector is the first to set the ships ablaze. 

In the *Iliad*, this book opens with Zeus' anger at Hera for her actions in book 14. As a result of this rage, he further allows the tide of battle to turn in the Trojans' favor. Yet, none of this is retained in either the textual or visual retelling. The reason for this is that the gods' plan only set this book in motion, and, as has been shown, the Tabula concerns itself more with outcomes, rather than plans that precipitate later actions. 

## Book 16

The retellings of this book are largely consistent, but the visual retelling offers a unique approach at the end of this book. Both retellings show the arming of Patroclus. The prose summary says that, upon hearing the report of the course of the war and seeing Protesliaus' ship burning, Achilles sends Patroclus to aid the Greeks. It also mentions specifically that he gives his companion his armor and his horses. The band with the images for this book only shows Patroclus donning the armor, but this is not surprising, since the armor plays a more prominent role in the narrative than the horses do. The labels for the visual retelling list Phoenix and Diomedes as being present during the arming episode. This conflicts with both the textual retelling and the *Iliad*. Given the intimate connection between Phoenix and Achilles, his presence, while not in the poem, is not implausible. However, Diomedes' presence does not match any of the extant sources, nor is there an especially close connection between these characters. He may have any number of roles in this episode, such as giving advice to Patroclus, assuring Achilles that he would return safely, pleading for Achilles to come himself, just to name a few. There is no way of knowing just from looking at the Tabula, since it is not corroborated by any other source. The scene on the Tabula is meant to remind an audience already deeply familiar with the traditional myths of the *Iliad*, not to spell out the finer connections and context. 

As mentioned above, Achilles sends Patroclus to fight after seeing the ship of Protesilaos burning. **MORE**

The visual and textual retelling both show Patroclus slaying Trojans on the battlefield. He kills at least one Trojan in the carved band, and routs a Trojan chariot, which is meant to stand for the larger Trojan forces. The prose summary explicitly mentions that he slays Sarpedon, the son of Zeus. Sarpedon's death is an important element in the fighting and death of Patroclus, but is shown not to be essential since it is omitted from the carved images. On the one hand, this is surprising, given Sarpedon's fame and the amount of images of him being carried from the battlefield found in classical art. However, a traditional audience would have considered his death tightly bound to the element of Patroclus fighting and dying at Troy. The mere presence of Patroclus fighting in Achilles armor is enough to call to mind the death of Sarpedon. He could have been explicitly named, as he is in the inscribed stele, or he could be absent but implied, as he is in the pictorial band for this book. 

The death of Patroclus is one of the core deaths that must occur within the narrative bounds of the *Iliad*. Much like Hector, he cannot live beyond the scope of the poem. The textual retelling mentions Hector slaying Patroclus and taking his armor. However, this scene does not appear within Patroclus' episode in the carved images. The image band for book 16 ends with Patroclus routing the Trojan chariot. One might expect an image such as the one found in the center of the band for book 22, where Achilles is seen killing Hector. However, since Patroclus' body figures in every scene of the episode of book 17, the artist was able to omit showing the moment that Patroclus dies, or even the confrontation with Hector. The reader of the Tabula was interested in contemplating the *Iliad* as a whole, continuous poem. Even though the visual retelling is divided into separate books, it is meant to be read as a whole work. With Patroclus' body so central to the following band, it may have seem redundant to have his body appear at the end of the band for book 16, as it does in the *Iliad. 


## Book 17

As another battle book, the retellings of 17 match the *Iliad* closely. The carved images show three different scenes where the Greeks defend Patroclus body, drag it off, and then load it onto a chariot. This expanded version of this episode reflects its lengthy treatment in the *Iliad*. The entirety of book 17 is dedicated to this episode of the fight for Patroclus body. As a result, the artist reflects that by extending the episode through the length of the band in a variety of scenes. However, this band lacks the typical labels found on the others. While it is possible that they have just faded, this is unlikely do to the viability of so many others. Pertain also notes that these labels are simply absent (**CITE PETRAIN**). Without this labels, it is impossible to assert which Greeks are shown defending their fallen comrade. In a certain sense, this is not essential information, as it does not change the outcome of the episode. It is due to the Greeks' devotion, named or unnamed, to Patroclus that the Trojans do not carry off the body. The textual retelling also does not provide any specific names, but rather solely states that there is a battle over the body. No attempt to link the lack of labels to the absence of names given on the corresponding section of the inscribed stele. These two retellings do cover the same material, but are independent of one another. They are stand-alone retellings that are meant to complement the other, not to mirror the other in a different medium. 

The textual retelling does add the 


## Book 18

Textual retelling just mentions the arms, and the Greeks brining the body home, in that order. The Iliad reverses the order, **with the body coming first** [look into this, apparently its in 19?] and then the arms. The Iliad has Achilles routing the Trojans from the walls by yelling, not sure how essential this is. We see the grieving for Patroclus in the images and the Iliad. Notably the Cyclopes in the images


## Book 19

Reconciliation mentioned in texts, not in images, where Achilles just arms and goes off to fight. textual retelling has him jump to 21, in the Scamander

## Book 20

*No textual retelling*
Poseidon and the gods join in both, essential, not well labels in images, just more fighting in Iliad


## Book 21

Textual retelling has Achilles killing Asteropaeus (due to his connection to the god). Images show him killing one figure, could stand for both? no label with him. Battle with Scamander, Poseidon is show in images, *look at role in Iliad*, textual retelling says that he "escapes the dangers of the river", vague and wishy washy on the gods, does not have him pushing to the gates, which sets up the next book, as the other two do. 


## Book 22

The death of Hector is highly standard throughout the retellings. The images specifically show them around the gates of Troy, while the textual retelling does not. The taking of the arms is not specifically shown in the images, but the fact that the body is nude while its being dragged, shows that it happened


## Book 23

Book 23 is highly standard across the retellings and the *Iliad*. The episode of Patroclus' funeral and then the ensuing funeral games do not vary at all. Given the highly compressed nature of any retelling, and the lack of action caused by the outcome of these funeral games, it is not surprising that neither the prose summary nor the images spend much time on these contests. They do not impact the tide of battle or lead to other events. Still, they are so closely tied to Patroclus' funeral, and receive such expanded attention in the *Iliad*, that they cannot be omitted. They are as essential to this point in the narrative as Patroclus' funeral itself is. Similarly, there is no need to show the variety of contests held, but instead the chariot race is enough to evoke the wider games. 


## Book 24

Ransom of Hector is similar in all, expanded in images, Hermes mentioned in Iliad and images, not in text, text is elaborate at the end about his burial 

## Overall Trends of the Analysis


