analysis.md, before:

# Analysis of Retellings of the Tabula Capitolina compared to the *Iliad*

Here I walk through the retellings for each book on the stone and compare them to the *Iliad*. Keep in mind that not all books appear in both the visual and textual retellings, while others are completely absent from the stone all together, due to the damage that it has sustained. I have placed the general trends of my analysis at the end of this page, after the discussion of the individual books. 

## Book 1

The tabula perfectly recreates the assembly scene, emphasizes the *loimos*, emphasizes returning the stuff too

## Book 7

The Tabula only mentions the wall and trench, possible that it was broken off before the duel


## Book 8

both talk about the battle, don't show the action in the heavens

## Book 9

both really show two phases, the planning and then the embassy

## Book 10

both have the night raid, it gets a lot of detail but is really just one episode. Famously the *Iliad* references Rhesus without giving his significance. obviously this wouldn't be in the tabula

## Book 11

Again, these both correspond exactly, with the chiefs falling in the same order too. 

## Book 12

Exactly the same, Hector breaks the walls. Only focuses on final action and outcome, not build up and side fighting or plans. 

## Book 13

textual retelling brief, just fighting. Iliad has a lot of fighting, images breaks it out into. The images, as is necessary, shows the battles. but why those? get because of Cassandra connection. but why not death of Alcathous?)

## Book 14

textual retelling brief, just fighting. Notably neither tabCap show Hera and Zeus episode, don't show things in heaven. Images show initial fight, Ajax and Poseidon makes sense and are prominent, but no Hector and Apollo mentioned in Iliad. 

## Book 15

textual retelling brief, just fighting. Images show prominent Trojans not emphasized in the Iliad. Aiantes prominent in images and Iliad. Only Iliad mentions gods 

## Book 16

all show the arming of Patroclus, Poenix and Diomedes are shown in the images but not present in the texts. All show him slaying enemies, but his death is not shown. perhaps it is too similar to the scene that beings book 17


## Book 17

Pretty similar overall, no labels on the tabula, no names mentioned in the textual retelling, but there's not a link there. Elaborated in the images, not sure why. not much change over who is defending the body. Mention Antiochus being sent in both text, sets up next book

## Book 18

Textual retelling just mentions the arms, and the Greeks brining the body home, in that order. The Iliad reverses the order, **with the body coming first** [look into this, apparently its in 19?] and then the arms. The Iliad has Achilles routing the Trojans from the walls by yelling, not sure how essential this is. We see the grieving for Patroclus in the images and the Iliad. Notably the Cyclopes in the images


## Book 19

Reconciliation mentioned in texts, not in images, where Achilles just arms and goes off to fight. textual retelling has him jump to 21, in the Scamander

## Book 20

*No textual retelling*
Poseidon and the gods join in both, essential, not well labels in images, just more fighting in Iliad


## Book 21

Textual retelling has Achilles killing Asteropaeus (due to his connection to the god). Images show him killing one figure, could stand for both? no label with him. Battle with Scamander, Poseidon is show in images, *look at role in Iliad*, textual retelling says that he "escapes the dangers of the river", vague and wishy washy on the gods, does not have him pushing to the gates, which sets up the next book, as the other two do. 


## Book 22




## Book 23




## Book 24


## Overall Trends of the Analysis

Commit message:

finished rough text through book 24

analysis.md, after:

# Analysis of Retellings of the Tabula Capitolina compared to the *Iliad*

Here I walk through the retellings for each book on the stone and compare them to the *Iliad*. Keep in mind that not all books appear in both the visual and textual retellings, while others are completely absent from the stone all together, due to the damage that it has sustained. I have placed the general trends of my analysis at the end of this page, after the discussion of the individual books. 

## Book 1

The tabula perfectly recreates the assembly scene, emphasizes the *loimos*, emphasizes returning the stuff too

## Book 7

The Tabula only mentions the wall and trench, possible that it was broken off before the duel


## Book 8

both talk about the battle, don't show the action in the heavens

## Book 9

both really show two phases, the planning and then the embassy

## Book 10

both have the night raid, it gets a lot of detail but is really just one episode. Famously the *Iliad* references Rhesus without giving his significance. obviously this wouldn't be in the tabula

## Book 11

Again, these both correspond exactly, with the chiefs falling in the same order too. 

## Book 12

Exactly the same, Hector breaks the walls. Only focuses on final action and outcome, not build up and side fighting or plans. 

## Book 13

textual retelling brief, just fighting. Iliad has a lot of fighting, images breaks it out into. The images, as is necessary, shows the battles. but why those? get because of Cassandra connection. but why not death of Alcathous?)

## Book 14

textual retelling brief, just fighting. Notably neither tabCap show Hera and Zeus episode, don't show things in heaven. Images show initial fight, Ajax and Poseidon makes sense and are prominent, but no Hector and Apollo mentioned in Iliad. 

## Book 15

textual retelling brief, just fighting. Images show prominent Trojans not emphasized in the Iliad. Aiantes prominent in images and Iliad. Only Iliad mentions gods 

## Book 16

all show the arming of Patroclus, Poenix and Diomedes are shown in the images but not present in the texts. All show him slaying enemies, but his death is not shown. perhaps it is too similar to the scene that beings book 17


## Book 17

Pretty similar overall, no labels on the tabula, no names mentioned in the textual retelling, but there's not a link there. Elaborated in the images, not sure why. not much change over who is defending the body. Mention Antiochus being sent in both text, sets up next book

## Book 18

Textual retelling just mentions the arms, and the Greeks brining the body home, in that order. The Iliad reverses the order, **with the body coming first** [look into this, apparently its in 19?] and then the arms. The Iliad has Achilles routing the Trojans from the walls by yelling, not sure how essential this is. We see the grieving for Patroclus in the images and the Iliad. Notably the Cyclopes in the images


## Book 19

Reconciliation mentioned in texts, not in images, where Achilles just arms and goes off to fight. textual retelling has him jump to 21, in the Scamander

## Book 20

*No textual retelling*
Poseidon and the gods join in both, essential, not well labels in images, just more fighting in Iliad


## Book 21

Textual retelling has Achilles killing Asteropaeus (due to his connection to the god). Images show him killing one figure, could stand for both? no label with him. Battle with Scamander, Poseidon is show in images, *look at role in Iliad*, textual retelling says that he "escapes the dangers of the river", vague and wishy washy on the gods, does not have him pushing to the gates, which sets up the next book, as the other two do. 


## Book 22

The death of Hector is highly standard throughout the retellings. The images specifically show them around the gates of Troy, while the textual retelling does not. The taking of the arms is not specifically shown in the images, but the fact that the body is nude while its being dragged, shows that it happened


## Book 23

All agree on the funeral of Patroclus and the funeral games


## Book 24

Ransom of Hector is similar in all, expanded in images, Hermes mentioned in Iliad and images, not in text, text is elaborate at the end about his burial 

## Overall Trends of the Analysis
