# Intro to Tabula Capitolina

## By Brian Clark


The Tabula Capitolina is one of twenty-two stone tablets that depict scenes from the Epic Cycle known as the Tabulae Iliacae. While these vast majority of these artifacts deal with the Epic Cycle, or events dealing with the Trojan War, some stones instead depicts scenes of Heracles or Alexander the Great. However, due to their similar design, material, and supposed function, they are still considered part of the Tabulae Iliacae group (Petrain 2). When compared to other surviving monuments, the pictoral representations found on the various tabulae seem to resemble other artifacts from the Agustan Age. The Tabula Capitolina's repeated focus on Aeneas, especially as he flees Troy during the *Iliupersis*, helps place this tabula, and therefore the others, during this period. The best solution would be to date these objects to the first century CE, at the end of or shortly after Augustus' rule (Petrain 20).

The Tabula Capitolina in particular shows scenes from the *Iliad*, the *Aethiopis*, the *Iliasparva* and the *Iliupersis*. Additionally, there is a prose summary of the *Iliad* engraved on a stele. However, the artifact has been damaged throughout its history.  The original stone would have been about 42cm by 25cm, but is now 30cm by 25cm. As a result of this damage, scenes from *Iliad* 2 through 12 and the stele with the summary for *Iliad* 1 through 7 were lost. In its current condition, the central block shows scences from the *Iliupersis*. It is bordered on the top with scenes from *Iliad* 1, on the bottom with scenes from the *Aethiopis* and the *Iliasparva* (one band for each epic), to the right with the surviving stele inscribed with the summary of *Iiad* 7 through 24, and would have been bordered on the left by the now-lost stele inscribred with the summary of *Iliad* 1 though 6. To the right of the extant stele are scenes from *Iliad*, starting with the band for book 13 moving up the stone until book 24. It is hardly a leap to asume that an identical band-layout would have been on the left side of the lost stele with scenes from *Iliad* 2 through 12. The stone itself offers no guide or order to reading it, which is an aspect that will be addressed later on in this project. 

I have focused exclusively on this tabula for a variety of reasons. First, it is one of the best preserved of these tabulae; many of them are highly fragmentary and only offer isolated retellings of one scene. Because of this, the Tabula Capitolina is further unique for its complexity, as it shows complex retellings made up of several different episodes. Secondly, having open access photography of this tabula made it the natural choice around which to base this study. The extant part of the tabula contains content from four different epics, and mixes both visual and textual retellings. *Iliad* 13 through 24 are present both in the textual summary as well as the carved figures. This double retelling combined in one document is a unique opportunity to look at retellings across different media.

The scholarship on the Tabulae Iliacae has been divided on the subject of their importance. Previously, they were thought to be low class carvings for adult education due to some inconsistencies between the stone and the Iliad. However, more recent scholars have shown that these highly complex and allusive documents are greatly worthy of interest. The wealth of images and text that they provide, particularly the Tabula Capitolina, make them excellent sources for the comparison of retellings. 

The drawing of this tabula done by Jahn was also invaluable to the study of this document.
